Shadie 
Cordai Shadie
Professor Guo
BUS 349 001
9 April 2023
The Effect of Servant Leadership On Employees
Leadership is a highly appreciated quality in many areas of life, but there is not just one definition of leadership. There are many different types of leadership and each type of leadership has its own usage as well as its own benefits. Over time, these leadership styles have been able to be distinguished from one another and we have begun to observe different styles in action and their effects. While some leadership styles may share certain attributes, there is a set list of characteristics that makes each leadership style unique. The style of servant leadership is a style of leadership that has more recently been distinguished, yet is relatively popular. Servant leadership is when leaders’ goal is to serve their followers. It can be beneficial in many aspects of life, but especially in areas where only guidance is usually needed, such as the workforce. Incorporating servant leadership in the workplace provides an overall positive work environment. It fosters employee confidence, engagement, satisfaction, and productivity, which benefits leaders, followers, and the organization overall. 
The term ‘servant leadership’ was first coined by Robert Greenleaf in 1977 in the publication of his book Servant Leadership. To many, this term sounds like a complete oxymoron, but in his publication, Greenleaf was able to explain this term. Servant leadership can be defined as a leadership style in which rather than attempting to obtain power and control, a leader’s goal is to serve others (Greenleaf 1997). Basically, the goal of the leader is the benefit/betterment of his followers, rather than personal or organizational gain. In addition to defining what servant leadership is, Greenleaf (1977) also discusses how the personal characteristics of an individual are a determinant of whether or not they are qualified to be a servant leader. Larry Spears (2010) detailed ten essential characteristics of a servant leader: 
1. Listening: Listening is a common characteristic of all leaders, but servant leaders listen closely to the individual thoughts of their followers and also reflect on the comprehensive thinking of their followers.
2. Empathy: In addition to listening to what their followers have to say, servant leaders are also able to understand and sympathize with their followers even if they find it difficult. 
3. Healing: Servant leaders must be able to heal trauma within themselves as well as within others. 
4. Awareness: While servant leaders must pay attention to intricate details, they must also view things from a holistic point of view. They must simultaneously look at the little things and the bigger picture. 
5. Persuasion: Servant leaders should be able to convince their followers, rather than rule authoritatively. 
6. Conceptualization: Servant leaders must think fully and thoroughly. 
7. Foresight: Servant leaders must be able to use their obtained knowledge and their own experiences to draw insights and make predictions. 
8. Stewardship: Servant leaders must be committed to serving for the benefit of others, rather than themselves. 
9. Commitment to the Growth of People: Servant leaders must be invested in the growth of their followers. 
10. Building Community: Servant leaders attempt to build a sense of trust and community with their followers. 
The possession of these characteristics is somewhat of a prerequisite for the role of the servant leader. But ownership of these characteristics is not enough for one to be a servant leader. It is also important that the leader establish a mutual sense of trust between him and his followers because this is the underlying thing that mediates the leader-follower relationship (Saleem et. al. 2020). With the possession of these critical leadership qualities and the establishment of trust between leader and follower, a servant leader is then in the proper position to lead. Once servant leadership is properly established, its effects can then be reflected within the organization.  
The main benefit (and most obvious) of servant leadership in the workplace is that it improves employee morale. After all, the whole point of servant leadership is the betterment of those who are being led; thus, it is a natural occurrence that employees who work under a servant leader will feel better. *Person-organization (PO) fit theory is a measure of the alignment of an individual's beliefs, values, and ethics to that of their organization (Morely 2007). Morley also divided PO fit into two categories: demands-abilities fit, which describes whether an individual is capable of situational demands, and need-supply fit, which concerns a person’s provisions and exigences (Rivkin 2014). Need-supply fit is what is thought to be of more importance when concerning employee morale, but demands-abilities fit acts as a precursor to the more critical fit. Thus, both fits are noteworthy. According to PO theory (Morely 2007), fit and strain are negatively correlated. Thus, a person with a high fit will have a low amount of strain, and a person with a low fit is expected to have a higher amount of stain. Previous research has hinted at the positive relationship between employee emotional health and servant leadership, but few have strictly focused on this relationship. Rivkin (2014) came up with two hypotheses; one was that servant leadership is negatively related to emotional exhaustion and depersonalization and above job ambiguity, and that servant leadership is negatively related to ego depletion and need for recovery and above emotional dissonance. After surveying a group of staff at a bank in Germany, it was found that both of Rivkin’s hypotheses were correct and servant leadership did, in fact, negatively correlate with psychological strain despite job ambiguity and emotional dissonance. This means that even in unfamiliar and uncertain situations, having a servant leader helps followers to feel more easy-minded. So, it is safe to assume that in workplace environments, where employees are usually accustomed to and comfortable in their environments, servant leadership can only enhance this confidence that employees already feel.
While achieving confidence is the true goal of servant leadership, the lifted spirits of employees are not the only thing that is brought about. This newfound attitude that employees possess also facilitates employee engagement. It makes perfect sense; after all, for servant leaders to create relationships with their followers, their followers have to be equally as engaged as they are. A study designed to examine the relationship between servant leadership and employees (Ahkras et al. 2021) was conducted in a Lebanese bank and it was found that servant leadership was favored by employees. With this study being conducted in Lebanon, a place where a) servant leadership is not as common and b) the country is split down the middle by religion, the results are especially significant because they suggest that servant leadership is effective in different cultural settings- even when the culture itself isn’t one cohesive culture unit. Not only did the Lebanese people respond well to a leadership style that was pretty different from the one that they were used to, but their response was overall positive despite cultural differences. Furthermore, the employees were engaged in more ways than one. According to Dierendock (2014), servant leadership engages followers in multiple dimensions including relational, ethical, emotional, and spiritual. Not only were the bank employees engaged relationally, but also emotionally and ethically. The employees seemed to more care not only about their work but why they were doing it and how they did it (Ahkras et al. 2021). Thus, their engagement was heightened in many different scopes- and some of these scopes previously had zero engagement at all.
Another area of improvement as a result of servant leadership was communication in the workplace. Good communication is an essential skill as a servant leader in order for both leader and follower to be on one accord (Greenleaf 1977). Although a leader may be acting in their followers’ best interest, failure to communicate a leader’s actions or why a leader may take a certain action could result in confusion among the followers, which could quickly unravel all of the trust that both parties worked so hard to build. While employee communication is very closely related to employee engagement, communication differs in that while engagement refers to each follower’s personal involvement in the workplace, communication can be externally noticed and affects both the individual and their peers. Ahakras’ (et. al. 2021) study implicated when it discussed the engagement throughout different cultures after implicating servant leadership. Another study that took place in China (Song et al. 2021) found that servant leadership promoted voice behavior. This means that employees felt more comfortable voicing their thoughts to both their employers as well as their peers. The significance of this comfortability is that it means that servant leaders are doing their jobs in fostering a positive work environment. The establishment of such an environment causes even more employees to feel comfortable exercising their voices, which further develops positivity. Thus, improved communication creates a cycle in which the result is an increasingly inviting and uplifting environment. 
Something else that employees gain from these positive interactions is job satisfaction. Job satisfaction can be defined as a measure of fulfillment with one’s job (Bennet et al. 2020). While job satisfaction can rely on a variety of factors (such as actual vs. desired job, level of job position, salary, etc.), the workplace environment is one of the more important factors. Servant leaders make sure to listen to the needs and concerns of their followers, so they can help their followers thrive individually and also, as a team. Servant leaders always make sure that they have the tools available that their followers need to thrive and thus, followers feel comfortable asking their leader for help because they know that they have everything that they need in order to prosper, including the support of their leader. Additionally, since servant leadership provides a culture filled with trust, belonging, and community, employees also feel comfortable and supported when going to their fellow peers. This feeling of community throughout the workforce allows the employees to be confident that they can complete their work, which leads to better job satisfaction. A study done by David Bennet and Roquel Hylton (2020) on job satisfaction among healthcare workers found that there was a positive relationship between overall job satisfaction and servant leadership. The servant leadership style is one that is greatly concerned with taking a humanistic approach to leadership. When employees feel like they are viewed as individuals rather than just workers, they feel as though their employers can focus on the larger scope of the workplace and not just outcomes. They feel employers are able to sympathize with them and perhaps even relate with them, which takes away the pressure to be perfect. Thus, while also striving for their goals, they can relax a bit and actually enjoy their jobs. 
Even though servant leadership puts so little emphasis on results, enhanced performance is actually another one of the benefits of servant leadership. McNeese-Smith (1997) thought that employees with higher job satisfaction would probably be more productive and committed to their jobs. Since employees lack worry and can trust their employees as well as their coworkers, they’d be free to focus all of their time and efforts on their actual job, leading to their individual success, the success of their team, and the success of the entire organization. This idea was emphasized in an analytical study done by Irvine and Evans (1995) and another study emphasized the idea that job dissatisfaction leads to indifference, increased problems, low morale, and struggling retention (Gangadhriah et al. 1990). A study that covered the effect of servant leadership on organization productivity (Ahkras et al. 2021) found that employee satisfaction highly impacted job performance. Once the performance was enhanced, the productivity of the organization shortly followed suit. Employees not only worked better alone but also were more productive when collaborating. Thus, the organization performed better on all levels, leading to an overall increase in productivity. Employees feel valued and supported and motivated by their leader and their peers, which fosters creativity and innovation, and ultimately results in a higher job output. 
Overall, servant leadership positively impacts the work environment for both employees and leaders. Before putting servant leadership into practice, it is important that leaders first make sure that they possess the characteristics of servant leaders and then establish a sense of trust between them and their employees. Once they have laid down the groundwork, they will then be able to enact servant leadership and experience its benefits. Servant leadership allows employees to be confident within themselves and within their work; causes employees to be more engaged with work relationships, their personal work, and the work of the organization; generates employee job satisfaction; and fosters increased performance as an individual and increased productivity as an organization. Thus, servant leadership is an excellent option when determining an effective style of leadership in the workplace. 